# DPPN: Deep Progression Predictor in NMIBC
## A procedure of training and test of prediction model for non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) progression

# Abstract
Background: Advances in high-throughput technology have provided insights into non-muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC). However, predicting clinical behavior and treatment response remains challenging. We aimed to develop a prognostic index (PI) using a deep learning method and long-term follow-up data to predict NMIBC progression and response to intravesical bacillus calmette-guérin (BCG) therapy.
Methods: We analyzed progression-associated genes using Cox regression analysis in 825 NMIBC patients from five independent cohorts. Predictive values were validated using a fully connected neural network (FNN) algorithm. Pathway enrichment analysis derived a PI consisting of core genes for NMIBC progression. The relationship between the PI and NMIBC prognosis was evaluated using Kaplan-Meier plots, log-rank tests, and immunohistochemical staining.
Results: Gene expression profiling identified a prognostic gene set of 1,789 genes for NMIBC progression in a training cohort (n=103). These findings were validated in four additional cohorts (n=722) using the FNN algorithm. Pathway enrichment and immunohistochemical analyses revealed a 23-gene signature, including established prognostic transcription factors and novel genes. Incorporating these genes into the PI system, we observed its significant association with NMIBC progression. Multivariate analysis and subset stratification by stage and grade confirmed the PI system as an independent risk factor (HR 4.95, 95% CI=1.54 to 15.885, p=0.007). Furthermore, the PI system effectively identified patients who would benefit from intravesical BCG therapy.
Conclusions: The 23-gene PI represents a promising diagnostic tool for identifying high-risk NMIBC patients with different clinical behaviors and responses to intravesical BCG therapy. It offers potential for personalized treatment strategies in NMIBC.
